efpmd/README.md, before:

# EFPMD

EFPMD is a molecular simulation program based on LIBEFP. It supports single
point energy and gradient calculations, semi-numerical Hessian and normal mode
analysis, geometry optimization, molecular dynamics simulations in
microcanonical (NVE), canonical (NVT), and isobaric-isothermal (NPT) ensembles.

Simulations can be accelerated by running in parallel mode on multi-core CPUs.
To enable parallel computation set `OMP_NUM_THREADS` environmental variable to
the desired number of parallel threads. For example on 4-core machine do this
in shell before starting the program:

	export OMP_NUM_THREADS=4

This will enable parallel computation using 4 threads and should give almost 4x
speedup in all calculations.

## Input file format

Lines beginning with the `#` symbol are ignored during input parsing.

### Generic parameters

##### Type of the simulation

`run_type [sp|grad|hess|opt|md]`

`sp` - single point energy calculation.

`grad` - energy gradient calculation.

`hess` - semi-numerical Hessian calculation and normal mode analysis.

`opt` - geometry optimization.

`md` - molecular dynamics simulation.

Default value: `sp`

##### Format of fragment input

`coord [xyzabc|points|rotmat]`

`xyzabc` - Coordinates of the center of mass and Euler angles.

`points` - Coordinates of three atoms for each fragment.

`rotmat` - Coordinates of the center of mass and rotation matrix.

Default value: `xyzabc`

See fragment input specification for more details.

##### Energy terms for EFP computation

`terms [elec [pol [disp [xr]]]]`

`elec` - Include electrostatics energy.

`pol` - Include polarization energy.

`disp` - Include dispersion energy.

`xr` - Include exchange repulsion energy.

Default value: `elec pol disp xr`

##### Electrostatic damping type

`elec_damp [screen|overlap|off]`

`screen` - Damping formula based on SCREEN group in the EFP potential.

`overlap` - Overlap-based damping formula. This damping correction is printed
as charge penetration energy.

`off` - No electrostatic damping.

Default value: `screen`

##### Dispersion damping type

`disp_damp [tt|overlap|off]`

`tt` - Damping based on the formula by Tang and Toennies.

`overlap` - Overlap-based dispersion damping.

`off` - No dispersion damping.

Default value: `tt`

##### Polarization damping type

`pol_damp [tt|off]`

`tt` - Tang and Toennies like damping formula.

`off` - No polarization damping.

Default value: `tt`

##### Enable/Disable the cutoff for fragment/fragment interactions

`enable_cutoff [true|false]`

Default value: `false`

##### Cutoff distance for fragment/fragment interactions

`swf_cutoff <value>`

Default value: `10.0`

Unit: Angstrom

##### Maximum number of steps to make

`max_steps <number>`

Default value: `100`

This specifies maximum number of steps for both geometry optimization and
molecular dynamics.

##### The path to the directory with fragment library

`fraglib_path <path>`

Default value: `"$(prefix)/share/libefp"` (data install directory)

The `<path>` parameter should not contain spaces or should be inside double
quotes otherwise.

##### The path to the directory with user-created fragments

`userlib_path <path>`

Default value: `"."` (current directory)

The `<path>` parameter should not contain spaces or should be in double quotes
otherwise.

### Periodic Boundary Conditions (PBC)

##### Enable/Disable PBC

`enable_pbc [true|false]`

Default value: `false`

Setting `enable_pbc` to `true` also sets `enable_cutoff` to `true`.

##### Periodic Box Size

`periodic_box <x> <y> <z>`

Default value: `30.0 30.0 30.0`

Unit: Angstrom

The smallest box dimension must be greater than `2 * swf_cutoff`.

### Geometry optimization related parameters

##### Optimization tolerance

`opt_tol <value>`

Default value: `0.0001`

Unit: Hartree/Bohr

Optimization will stop when maximum gradient component is less than `opt_tol`
and RMS gradient is less than one third of `opt_tol`.

### Hessian calculation related parameters

##### Hessian accuracy

`hess_central [true|false]`

Default value: `false`

If `hess_central` is `true` then the more accurate central differences will be
used for numerical Hessian calculation. Otherwise only forward differences will
be used. Note that central differences require twice as many gradient
calculations.

##### Differentiation step length for distances

`hess_step_dist <value>`

Default value: `0.001`

Unit: Angstrom

##### Differentiation step length for angles

`hess_step_angle <value>`

Default value: `0.01`

Unit: Radian

### Molecular dynamics related parameters

##### Ensemble

`ensemble [nve|nvt|npt]`

`nve` - Microcanonical ensemble.

`nvt` - Canonical ensemble with Nose-Hoover thermostat. For the description of
the algorithm see _Phys. Rev. A 31, 1695 (1985)_.

`npt` - Isobaric-isothermal ensemble. This also sets `enable_pbc` to `true`.
For the description of the algorithm see _Mol. Phys. 78, 533 (1993)_.

Default value: `nve`

##### Time step

`time_step <value>`

Unit: Femtosecond

Default value: `1.0`

##### Print step

`print_step <value>`

Default value: `1`

Number of steps between outputs of the system state.

##### Simulation temperature

`temperature <value>`

Unit: Kelvin

Default value: `300.0`

Target simulation temperature for NVT and NPT thermostats.

##### Simulation pressure

`pressure <value>`

Unit: Bar

Default value: `1.0`

Target simulation pressure for NPT barostat. Note that whether or not pressure
coupling is used, the pressure value will oscillate significantly. Fluctuations
on the order of hundreds of bar are typical. This variation is entirely normal
due to the fact that pressure is a macroscopic property and can only be
measured properly as time average. The actual variations of instantaneous
pressure depend on the size of the system and the values of barostat
parameters.

##### Thermostat parameter

`thermostat_tau <value>`

Unit: Femtosecond

Default value: `1000.0`

Temperature relaxation time parameter of the Nose-Hoover thermostat.

##### Barostat parameter

`barostat_tau <value>`

Unit: Femtosecond

Default value: `10000.0`

Pressure relaxation time parameter of the barostat.

### Fragment input

One or more `fragment <name>` groups.

If `<name>` contains an `_l` suffix the parameters (`.efp` files) for this
fragment will be searched for in the `fraglib_path` directory. Otherwise the
directory specified by the `userlib_path` option will be used. The name of the
`.efp` file must be the same as the name of the fragment without an `_l` suffix
and must be all lowercase. For example for the fragment named `H2O_L` the
parameters must be in the `fraglib_path` directory in the file named `h2o.efp`.
For the fragment named `NH3` the parameters must be in the `userlib_path`
directory in the file named `nh3.efp`.

Fragment position and orientation are specified on the next line(s).

##### Format of input when `coord` is `xyzabc`

	fragment h2o
		0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0

The numbers are coordinates of the center of mass of a fragment in Angstroms
and three Euler rotation angels in Radians.

##### Format of input when `coord` is `points`

	fragment h2o
		0.0 0.0 0.0
		1.0 0.0 0.0
		0.0 1.0 0.0

The numbers are coordinates of three points belonging to a fragment in Angstroms.

##### Format of input when `coord` is `rotmat`

	fragment h2o
		0.0 0.0 0.0
		1.0 0.0 0.0
		0.0 1.0 0.0
		0.0 0.0 1.0

The numbers are coordinates of the center of mass of a fragment in Angstroms
and a 3 x 3 rotation matrix.

Commit message:

Add an option to initialize MD velocities.

efpmd/README.md, after:

# EFPMD

EFPMD is a molecular simulation program based on LIBEFP. It supports single
point energy and gradient calculations, semi-numerical Hessian and normal mode
analysis, geometry optimization, molecular dynamics simulations in
microcanonical (NVE), canonical (NVT), and isobaric-isothermal (NPT) ensembles.

Simulations can be accelerated by running in parallel mode on multi-core CPUs.
To enable parallel computation set `OMP_NUM_THREADS` environmental variable to
the desired number of parallel threads. For example on 4-core machine do this
in shell before starting the program:

	export OMP_NUM_THREADS=4

This will enable parallel computation using 4 threads and should give almost 4x
speedup in all calculations.

## Input file format

Lines beginning with the `#` symbol are ignored during input parsing.

### Generic parameters

##### Type of the simulation

`run_type [sp|grad|hess|opt|md]`

`sp` - single point energy calculation.

`grad` - energy gradient calculation.

`hess` - semi-numerical Hessian calculation and normal mode analysis.

`opt` - geometry optimization.

`md` - molecular dynamics simulation.

Default value: `sp`

##### Format of fragment input

`coord [xyzabc|points|rotmat]`

`xyzabc` - Coordinates of the center of mass and Euler angles.

`points` - Coordinates of three atoms for each fragment.

`rotmat` - Coordinates of the center of mass and rotation matrix.

Default value: `xyzabc`

See fragment input specification for more details.

##### Energy terms for EFP computation

`terms [elec [pol [disp [xr]]]]`

`elec` - Include electrostatics energy.

`pol` - Include polarization energy.

`disp` - Include dispersion energy.

`xr` - Include exchange repulsion energy.

Default value: `elec pol disp xr`

##### Electrostatic damping type

`elec_damp [screen|overlap|off]`

`screen` - Damping formula based on SCREEN group in the EFP potential.

`overlap` - Overlap-based damping formula. This damping correction is printed
as charge penetration energy.

`off` - No electrostatic damping.

Default value: `screen`

##### Dispersion damping type

`disp_damp [tt|overlap|off]`

`tt` - Damping based on the formula by Tang and Toennies.

`overlap` - Overlap-based dispersion damping.

`off` - No dispersion damping.

Default value: `tt`

##### Polarization damping type

`pol_damp [tt|off]`

`tt` - Tang and Toennies like damping formula.

`off` - No polarization damping.

Default value: `tt`

##### Enable/Disable the cutoff for fragment/fragment interactions

`enable_cutoff [true|false]`

Default value: `false`

##### Cutoff distance for fragment/fragment interactions

`swf_cutoff <value>`

Default value: `10.0`

Unit: Angstrom

##### Maximum number of steps to make

`max_steps <number>`

Default value: `100`

This specifies maximum number of steps for both geometry optimization and
molecular dynamics.

##### The path to the directory with fragment library

`fraglib_path <path>`

Default value: `"$(prefix)/share/libefp"` (data install directory)

The `<path>` parameter should not contain spaces or should be inside double
quotes otherwise.

##### The path to the directory with user-created fragments

`userlib_path <path>`

Default value: `"."` (current directory)

The `<path>` parameter should not contain spaces or should be in double quotes
otherwise.

### Periodic Boundary Conditions (PBC)

##### Enable/Disable PBC

`enable_pbc [true|false]`

Default value: `false`

Setting `enable_pbc` to `true` also sets `enable_cutoff` to `true`.

##### Periodic Box Size

`periodic_box <x> <y> <z>`

Default value: `30.0 30.0 30.0`

Unit: Angstrom

The smallest box dimension must be greater than `2 * swf_cutoff`.

### Geometry optimization related parameters

##### Optimization tolerance

`opt_tol <value>`

Default value: `0.0001`

Unit: Hartree/Bohr

Optimization will stop when maximum gradient component is less than `opt_tol`
and RMS gradient is less than one third of `opt_tol`.

### Hessian calculation related parameters

##### Hessian accuracy

`hess_central [true|false]`

Default value: `false`

If `hess_central` is `true` then the more accurate central differences will be
used for numerical Hessian calculation. Otherwise only forward differences will
be used. Note that central differences require twice as many gradient
calculations.

##### Differentiation step length for distances

`hess_step_dist <value>`

Default value: `0.001`

Unit: Angstrom

##### Differentiation step length for angles

`hess_step_angle <value>`

Default value: `0.01`

Unit: Radian

### Molecular dynamics related parameters

##### Ensemble

`ensemble [nve|nvt|npt]`

`nve` - Microcanonical ensemble.

`nvt` - Canonical ensemble with Nose-Hoover thermostat. For the description of
the algorithm see _Phys. Rev. A 31, 1695 (1985)_.

`npt` - Isobaric-isothermal ensemble. This also sets `enable_pbc` to `true`.
For the description of the algorithm see _Mol. Phys. 78, 533 (1993)_.

Default value: `nve`

##### Time step

`time_step <value>`

Unit: Femtosecond

Default value: `1.0`

##### Print step

`print_step <value>`

Default value: `1`

Number of steps between outputs of the system state.

##### Assign initial velocities

`velocitize [true|false]`

Default value: `false`

If `true` then random initial velocities will be assigned to fragments using
Gaussian distribution. Velocity magnitudes are chosen so that initial
temperature of the system is approximately equal to the target simulation
temperature.

##### Simulation temperature

`temperature <value>`

Unit: Kelvin

Default value: `300.0`

Target simulation temperature for NVT and NPT thermostats.

##### Simulation pressure

`pressure <value>`

Unit: Bar

Default value: `1.0`

Target simulation pressure for NPT barostat. Note that whether or not pressure
coupling is used, the pressure value will oscillate significantly. Fluctuations
on the order of hundreds of bar are typical. This variation is entirely normal
due to the fact that pressure is a macroscopic property and can only be
measured properly as time average. The actual variations of instantaneous
pressure depend on the size of the system and the values of barostat
parameters.

##### Thermostat parameter

`thermostat_tau <value>`

Unit: Femtosecond

Default value: `1000.0`

Temperature relaxation time parameter of the Nose-Hoover thermostat.

##### Barostat parameter

`barostat_tau <value>`

Unit: Femtosecond

Default value: `10000.0`

Pressure relaxation time parameter of the barostat.

### Fragment input

One or more `fragment <name>` groups.

If `<name>` contains an `_l` suffix the parameters (`.efp` files) for this
fragment will be searched for in the `fraglib_path` directory. Otherwise the
directory specified by the `userlib_path` option will be used. The name of the
`.efp` file must be the same as the name of the fragment without an `_l` suffix
and must be all lowercase. For example for the fragment named `H2O_L` the
parameters must be in the `fraglib_path` directory in the file named `h2o.efp`.
For the fragment named `NH3` the parameters must be in the `userlib_path`
directory in the file named `nh3.efp`.

Fragment position and orientation are specified on the next line(s).

##### Format of input when `coord` is `xyzabc`

	fragment h2o
		0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0

The numbers are coordinates of the center of mass of a fragment in Angstroms
and three Euler rotation angels in Radians.

##### Format of input when `coord` is `points`

	fragment h2o
		0.0 0.0 0.0
		1.0 0.0 0.0
		0.0 1.0 0.0

The numbers are coordinates of three points belonging to a fragment in Angstroms.

##### Format of input when `coord` is `rotmat`

	fragment h2o
		0.0 0.0 0.0
		1.0 0.0 0.0
		0.0 1.0 0.0
		0.0 0.0 1.0

The numbers are coordinates of the center of mass of a fragment in Angstroms
and a 3 x 3 rotation matrix.
